---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2025-07-03
---

# 33. `OpenGL` Programming 1

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 03-07-2025</span>

Because `OpenGL` is an independent platform, we can write code for any operating system using the `OpenGL Utility Library` (`glut`). This library handles things like making windows, getting keyboard inputs, run an `event handler` or message loop in our graphic application.

- `Functions` with "gl" prefix are from core `OpenGL`
- `Functions` with "glu" prefix are from `glut`

---

```cpp
int glutCreateWindow(char* name);
```

This creates a `window` which is set to `current window` implicitly. Each `window` has an `OpenGL context` associated with it and changes to its state can be done immediately after the `window` is created. The `display state` of `window` is not acted upon unless we have entered the `glutMainLoop`.

## X Implementation Notes

The proper `X Inter-Client Communication Conventions Manual (ICCCM)` top-level properties are established. The `#!cpp WM_COMMAND` property that lists the command line used to invoke the `GLUT` program is only established for the first `window` created.

## Example Functions

```cpp
#include <GL/glut.h>
int main () {
	// Set up the OpenGL rendering context
	glutInitDisplayMode(GLUT_RGB | GLUT_DOUBLE | GLUT_DEPTH);

	// Create a window and set its width and height.
	glutCreateWindow("Deform");
	glutReshapeWindow(640, 480);

	// The keyboard function gets called whenever we hit a key.
	glutKeyboardFunc(keyboard);

	// The display function gets called whenever the window requires an update or when we explicitly call
	glutDisplayFunc(display);

	// The reshape function gets called whenever the window changes shape
	glutReshapeFunc(reshape);

	// The idle function gets called when there are no window-events to process.
	glutIdleFunc(idle);

	// Get the ball rolling!
	glutMainLoop();
}
```

### `#!cpp void glutInitDisplayMode(unsigned int mode);`

This `function` sets the initial display mode.

#### Mode

Display mode, normally the bitwise OR-ing of `GLUT` display mode bit masks.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_RGBA`

`Bit mask` to select an `RGBA` mode window. This is the default if neither `#!cpp GLUT_RGBA` nor `#!cpp GLUT_INDEX` are specified.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_RGB`

An alias for `#!cpp GLUT_RGBA`.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_INDEX`

`Bit mask` to select a color index mode window. This overrides `GLUT_RGBA` if it is also specified.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_SINGLE`

`Bit mask` to select a single buffered `window`. This is the default if neither `#!cpp GLUT_DOUBLE` or `#!cpp GLUT_SINGLE` are specified.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_DOUBLE`

`Bit mask` to select a double buffered `window`. This overrides `GLUT_SINGLE` if it is also specified.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_ACCUM`

`Bit mask` to select a `window` with an accumulation `buffer`.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_ALPHA`

`Bit mask` to select a `window` with an alpha component to the color `buffer`(s).

##### `#!cpp GLUT_DEPTH`

`Bit mask` to select a window with a depth `buffer`.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_STENCIL`

`Bit mask` to select a `window` with a stencil `buffer`.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_MULTISAMPLE`

`Bit mask` to select a `window` with multisampling support. If multisampling is not available, a non-multisampling `window` will automatically be chosen. Both the `OpenGL client-side` and `server-side` implementations must support the `GLX_SAMPLE_SGIS` extension for multisampling to be available.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_STEREO`

`Bit mask` to select a stereo `window`.

##### `#!cpp GLUT_LUMINANCE`

`Bit mask` to select a `window` with a `luminance color model`. This model provides the functionality of `OpenGL's RGBA color model`, but the `green` and `blue` components are not maintained in the `frame buffer`.[^1] Instead each `pixel`[^2]'s `red` component is converted to an index between zero and `#!cpp glutGet(GLUT_WINDOW_COLORMAP_SIZE) - 1` and looked up in a `per window` color map to determine the color of `pixels`[^2] within the `window`. The initial colormap of `#!cpp GLUT_LUMINANCE` `windows` is initialized to be a linear gray ramp, but can be modified with `GLUT`'s colormap routines.

> [!NOTE] `#!cpp GLUT_LUMINANCE` is not supported on most OpenGL platforms.

### `#!cpp void glutReshapeWindow(int width, int height);`

Requests a change to the size of the current `window`. It disables the full screen status of a `window` if previously enabled.

### `#!cpp void glutKeyboardFunc(void (*func)(unsigned char key, int x, int y))`

Requires a callback `function` which takes the `ASCII` data alongside the mouse coordinates (`x` and `y`) when the key is pressed.

`#!cpp glutGetModifiers` can be used to determine the state of modifier keys.

### `#!cpp void glutDisplayFunc(void (*func)(void));`

`GLUT` determines when the display callback should be triggered based on the `window`'s redisplay state. The redisplay state for a `window` can be either set explicitly by calling `glutPostRedisplay` or implicitly as the result of `window` damage reported by the `window system`. Multiple posted redisplays for a `window` are coalesced by `GLUT` to minimize the number of display callbacks called.

### `#!cpp void glutReshapeFunc(void (*func)(int width, int height));`

A reshape call back is also triggered alongside the first display call back.

### `#!cpp void glutIdleFunc(void (*func)(void));`

Sets the global idle callback to be `func` so a `GLUT` program can perform background processing tasks or continuous animation when `window system` events are not being received. If enabled, the idle callback is continuously called when events are not being received.

### `#!cpp void glutMainLoop(void);`

`glutMainLoop` enters the `GLUT` event processing loop. This routine should be called at most once in a `GLUT` program. Once called, this routine will never return. It will call as necessary any callbacks that have been registered.

### `#!cpp void glutSwapBuffers(void);`

An implicit `glFlush` is done by `glutSwapBuffers` before it returns.

## References

[^1]: Read more about [[cs602_02|frame buffer]].
[^2]: Read more about [[cs602_04|pixels]].