---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2025-03-11
---

# 03. System of Linear Equations

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 11-03-2025</span>

## Linear Equations

The equation of a straight `line`[^1] in $\mathbb R^2$ (the `plane`[^2]) can be written as  

$$a_1x + a_2y = b$$

Similarly, for $\mathbb R^3$ (the `space`), the equation can be written as  

$$a_1x + a_2y + a_3z= b$$

Similarly, for a `hyper plane` $\mathbb R^n$  

$$a_1x_1 + a_2x_2 + \cdots + a_nx_n = b$$

where $a_1, a_2, \ldots, b$ are constants and at least one of the $a$ is not zero.

## Homogeneous Linear Equation

If $b = 0$ then the previous equation is called `homogeneous linear equation`.

$$a_1x_1 + a_2x_2 + \cdots + a_nx_n = 0$$

> [!NOTE] A [linear equation](#linear-equations) contains following characteristics
> - They do not involve product of variables, such as $xy$ terms.
> - The maximum power of the variables involved, do not exceed one, such as $x^1$ is the maximum. Otherwise the equation is not [linear](#linear-equations).
> - The variables are not passed as arguments to `functions`[^3] like
> 	- Trigonometric functions
> 	- Exponential functions
> 	- `Logarithmic functions`[^4]

## System of Linear Equations

A finite `set`[^5] of [linear equations](#linear-equations) is called a `linear system` or a system of [linear equations](#linear-equations).  
The variables involved are called the `unknowns`.

## General System of Linear Equations

A general linear system of $m$ equations in $n$ `unknowns` $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ can be written as

$$
\begin{array}{cccccc}
    a_{11}x_1 &+& a_{12}x_2 &+& \cdots &+& a_{1n}x_n &= b_1 \\
    a_{21}x_1 &+& a_{22}x_2 &+& \cdots &+& a_{2n}x_n &= b_2 \\
    \vdots    & & \vdots    & &        & & \vdots    &\vdots \\
    a_{m1}x_1 &+& a_{m2}x_2 &+& \cdots &+& a_{mn}x_n &= b_m
\end{array}
$$

## Solution of a System of Linear Equations

A solution of a [system of linear equations](#system-of-linear-equations) in $n$ `unknowns` $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ is a `sequence` of $n$ `numbers`[^6] $s_1, s_2, \ldots, s_n$ such that when substituted for $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$, respectively, makes every [linear equation](#linear-equations) as `true` statements.  
The `set`[^5] $\{s_1, s_2, \ldots, s_n\}$ is called the `solution set`.[^5]

## Linear System in 2 Unknowns

Imagine a [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) in $\mathbb R^2$.

$$a_1x + b_1y = c_1$$

$$a_2x + b_2y = c_2$$

There are 3 possibilities.

1. The `lines`[^1] are parallel and distinct. Hence they don't intersect and there is no solution.
2. The `lines`[^1] are not parallel and intersect at only one point, which is the solution.
3. The `lines`[^1] are parallel and coincide. Hence there are infinite solutions.

### Consistent

If the [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) has at least one solution then it is called `consistent`.

### Inconsistent

If the [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) has no solutions then it is called `inconsistent`.

## Linear System in 3 Unknowns

Imagine a [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) in $\mathbb R^3$.  

$$a_1x + b_1y + c_1z = d_1$$

$$a_2x + b_2y + c_2z = d_2$$

$$a_3x + b_3y + c_3z = d_3$$

In this case, graph of each equation is a `plane`.[^2]  
The solutions can be

- Non existent
- A single point
- A `line`[^1]
- A `plane`[^2]

## Theorem 1

A [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) has 

- zero
- one
- infinite

solutions.

## Example 1

$$x - y = 1$$

$$2x + y = 6$$

Adding both equations, we get $x = \frac 7 3$.  
Plugging $x$ in either of the equations, we get $y = \frac 4 3$.  
Therefore, this system has a `unique solution` which is the point $\left(\frac 7 3, \frac 4 3\right)$.

## Example 2

$$x + y = 4$$

$$3x + 3y = 6$$

After multiplying the first equation by $3$ and subtracting it from second equation, we get  

$$0 = 6$$

Geometrically, this means there is no intersection between the lines due to them being parallel and distinct. Hence no solution.

## Example 3

$$4x - 2y = 1$$

$$16x - 8y = 4$$

Multiplying the first equation by $-4$ and then adding it to second equation, we get  

$$0 = 0$$

This means that all the points which satisfy either the first or second equation are the solution. Geometrically, this means that these lines are parallel and coincide with each other.

## Parametric Representation

Imagine  

$$4x - 2y = 1$$

Now let $y = t$  

$$4x - 2t = 1$$

$$\implies x(t) = \frac 1 4 + \frac 1 2 t, \quad y = t$$

In this case, selecting any $t$ can possibly yield $x(t)$.  
Hence the solution(s) are $(x(t), t)$.

### Example

$$x - y + 2z - 5= 0$$

$$2x - 2y + 4z - 10 = 0$$

$$3x - 3y + 6z - 15 = 0$$

Notice how if you multiply first equation by $2$, you get the second equation and if you multiply by $3$, you get the 3rd equation.  
This means that any point satisfying any equation, will satisfy the whole system because these all planes coincide.

## Matrix Notation

Imagine that

$$
\begin{align}
	x_1 - &2x_2 + x_3 &= 0 \\
	&2x_2 - 8x_3 &= 8 \\
	-4x_1 + &5x_2 + 9x_3 &= -9 \\
\end{align}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow$$

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1\\
	0 & 2 & -8\\
	-4 & 5 & 9
\end{bmatrix}
$$

This `matrix`[^7] is called the `coefficient matrix`.  
The `augmented matrix` is obtained by appending the right side of the [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations).

$$
A_b = 
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1 & 0\\
	0 & 2 & -8 & 8\\
	-4 & 5 & 9 & -9
\end{bmatrix}
$$

## Solving a Linear System

### Successive Elimination Method

In this method the $x_1$ term of first equation is used to eliminate $x_1$ terms from the other systems. Then $x_2$ term of second equation is used in similar way and so on.  
Lets take the [linear system](#system-of-linear-equations) from previous example

$$
A_b = 
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1 & 0\\
	0 & 2 & -8 & 8\\
	-4 & 5 & 9 & -9
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow \text{eq}_3 = 4 \text{ eq}_1 + \text{eq}_3$$

$$
=
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1 & 0\\
	0 & 2 & -8 & 8\\
	0 & -3 & 13 & -9
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow \text{eq}_2 = \frac 1 2 \text{ eq}_2$$

$$
=
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1 & 0\\
	0 & 1 & -4 & 4\\
	0 & -3 & 13 & -9
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow \text{eq}_3 = 3 \text{ eq}_2 + \text{eq}_3$$

$$
=
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 1 & 0\\
	0 & 1 & -4 & 4\\
	0 & 0 & 1 & 3
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow \text{eq}_2 = 4 \text{ eq}_3 + \text{eq}_2$$

$$
=
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & -2 & 0 & -3\\
	0 & 1 & 0 & 16\\
	0 & 0 & 1 & 3
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$\Big\downarrow \text{eq}_1 = 2 \text{ eq}_2 + \text{eq}_1$$

$$
=
\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & 0 & 0 & 29\\
	0 & 1 & 0 & 16\\
	0 & 0 & 1 & 3
\end{bmatrix}
$$

$$
=
\begin{cases}
x_1 = 29 \\
x_2 = 16 \\
x_3 = 3
\end{cases}
$$

## Elementary Row Operations

1. Replacement. Replace a row by adding a nonzero multiple of any row to it.
2. Interchange. Interchange two rows.
3. Scaling. Multiply all `entries`[^7] in the row by a nonzero value.

## Row Equivalent Matrices

If $A$ and $B$ are two `matrices`[^7] such that $B$ can be obtained by performing finite amount of elementary row operations on $A$ and vise versa then they are said to be row equivalent matrices.  

$$A \sim B$$

> [!TIP] If $A$ and $B$ are `augmented matrices` of two [linear systems](#system-of-linear-equations) and $A \sim B$ then they both have same `solution set`.

## Two Fundamental Questions

1. Is the [system](#system-of-linear-equations) [consistent](#consistent); that is, does at least one solution exist? 
2. If a solution exists is it the only one; that is, is the solution unique?

## References

Read more about [[M_Notations|notations and symbols]].

[^1]: Read more about [[4. Lines|lines]].
[^2]: Read more about [[3. Coordinate Planes and Graphs|planes]].
[^3]: Read more about [[M_Function|functions]].
[^4]: Read more about [[M_Logarithm|logarithms]].
[^5]: Read more about [[M_Set|sets]].
[^6]: Read more about [[M_Numbers|numbers]].
[^7]: Read more about [[mth501_02|matrices]].