---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2025-03-10
---

# 01. Introduction and Overview

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 10-03-2025</span>

## History

Algebra is named after `Mohammed Ibn-e-Musa al-Khowarizmi`. Around 825, he wrote a book entitled `al-jabr u'l muqubalah` (`the science of reduction and cancellation`).  
Algebra is branch of Mathematics which deals with the relationships of unknown and known quantities.

## Terminology

An `algebraic term` is a product of a number with one or more variables.

### Example

$4x$ is an `algebraic term` where $4$ is called the coefficient and $x$ is called the variable.

## Algebraic Expressions

An `expression` is a collection of 

- Numbers
- Variables
- Positive or negative signs of operations

which make up the mathematical and logical behavior.

### Example

$$8x^2 + 9x - 1$$

## What is Linear Algebra

It provides tools for analyzing

- Differential Equations
- Statistical Processes
- Physical Phenomena

It creates a formal link between `matrix calculus` and use of linear or quadratic transformations.

## Applications of Linear Algebra

It makes possible to work with large arrays of data and to make sense out of it in a very compact way.  
It has applications in different fields such as

- Computer Graphics
- Electronics
- Chemistry
- Biology
- Differential Equations
- Economics
- Business
- Psychology
- Engineering
- Analytic Geometry
- Chaos Theory
- Cryptography
- Fractal Geometry
- Game Theory
- Graph Theory
- Linear Programming
- Operations Research

## Why Use Linear Algebra

Since linearity is fundamental to any mathematical analysis, this subject lays the foundation for many branches of mathematics.  
From experiments, we get a lot of discrete results. Linear algebra provides us tools to deal with these effectively and is used in areas like

- Physics
- Fluid Dynamics
- Signal Processing
- Numerical Analysis

## Objects in Linear Algebra

`Vector spaces` and their transformations are useful as they cover a broad range of applications.

1. The solutions of homogeneous systems of linear equations form paradigm examples of `vector spaces`.
2. The `vectors`[^1] of physics, such as force, as the language suggests, also provide paradigmatic examples.
3. Solutions to specific systems of `differential equations`[^2] also form `vector spaces`.
4. `Statistics` uses `linear algebra` a lot.
5. `Signal processing` uses `linear algebra` a lot.
6. `Vector spaces` appear in `number theory` including study of `field extensions`.
7. `Linear algebra` motivates `abstract algebra`.
8. `Vector spaces` appear in the study of `differential geometry` through the `tangent` bundle of a `manifold`.
9. Many `mathematical models`, especially `discrete` ones, use `matrices` to represent critical relationships and processes. These are used in
	- Engineering
	- Economics
	- Social sciences

There are 2 principle aspects to `linear algebra`

- Theoretical
- Computational

The art is to move back and forth from one to another.

## References

Read more about [[M_Notations|notations and symbols]].

[^1]: Read more about [[10. Introduction to vectors|vectors]].
[^2]: Read more about [[mth401_02|differential equations]].