---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2024-12-02
---

# 22. Applications of Second order Differential Equations

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 02-12-2024</span>

A single differential equation can serve as mathematical model for many different phenomena in science and engineering.  
Different forms of the 2nd order linear differential equation  

$$a\frac{d^2y}{dx^2}+b\frac{dy}{dx}+cy=f(x)$$

appear in the analysis of problems in physics, chemistry and biology.

## Simple Harmonic Motion

When the Newton’s 2nd law is combined with the Hook’s Law, we can derive a differential equation governing the motion of a mass attached to spring–the simple harmonic motion.

### Hook's Law

Suppose that

- A mass is attached to a flexible spring suspended from a rigid support.
- The spring stretches by an amount $s$.
- The spring exerts a restoring $F$ opposite to the direction of elongation or stretch.

The hook's law states that the force $F$ is proportional to the elongation $s$  

$$F = ks$$

Where $k$ is called the spring constant.

#### Note that

- Different masses stretch a string by different amount i.e. $s$ is different for different $m$.
- The spring is characterized by the spring constant $k$.
- For example if $W = 10 \text{ lbs}$ and $s = \frac 1 2 \text{ ft}$  
Then  

$$F = ks$$

$$10 = \frac 1 2 k$$

$$k = 20 \frac {\text{lbs}}{\text{ft}}$$

If $W = 8 \text{ lbs}$ then  

$$8 = 20(s) \implies s = \frac 2 5 \text{ ft}$$

### Newton's Second Law

When a force $F$ acts upon a body, the acceleration $a$ is produced in the direction of the force whose magnitude is proportional to the magnitude of force  

$$F = ma$$

Where $m$ is constant of proportionality and it represents mass of the body.

#### Weight

The gravitational force exerted by the earth on a body of mass $m$ is called weight of the body, denoted by $W$.  
In the absence of air resistance, the only force acting on a freely falling body is its weight. Thus from Newton’s 2nd law of motion  

$$W = mg$$

Where $m$ is measured in `slugs`, `kilograms` or `grams` and  

$$g = 32 \frac {ft}{s^2}, 9.8 \frac m {s^2}, 980 \frac {cm}{s^2}$$

#### Differential Equation

When a body of mass $m$ is attached to a spring  
The spring stretches by an amount $s$ and attains an equilibrium position.  
At the equilibrium position, the weight is balanced by the restoring force $ks$.  
Thus, the condition of equilibrium is  

$$mg = ks \implies mg - ks = 0$$

If the mass is displaced by an amount $x$ from its equilibrium position and then released.  
The restoring force becomes $k(s + x)$.  
So the resultant of weight and the restoring force acting on the body is given by  

$$\text{Resultant } = -k(s + x) + mg$$

By Newton’s 2nd Law of motion, we can written  

$$m\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}=-k(s+x)+mg$$

$$m\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}=-kx-ks+mg$$

$$mg-ks=0$$

$$\therefore m\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}=-kx$$

The negative indicates that the restoring force of the spring acts opposite to the direction of motion.  
The displacements measured below the equilibrium position are positive.  
By dividing with $m$ , the last equation can be written as  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\frac{k}{m}x=0$$

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\omega^2x=0$$

Where $\omega^2 = \frac k m$.  
This equation is known as the equation of simple harmonic motion or as the free un-damped motion.

##### Initial Conditions

Associated with the differential equation  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\omega^2x=0$$

are the obvious initial conditions  

$$x(0)=\alpha, \quad x'(0)=\beta$$

These initial conditions represent the initial displacement and the initial velocity. For example

- If $\alpha > 0, \beta < 0$ then the body starts from a point below the equilibrium position with an imparted upward velocity.
- If $\alpha < 0, \beta = 0$ then the body starts from rest $|\alpha|$ units above the equilibrium position.

#### Solution and Equation of Motion

Consider the equation of simple harmonic motion  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\omega^2x=0$$

Put  

$$x=e^{mx}, \quad \frac{d^2x}{dt^2}=m^2e^{mx}$$

Then the auxiliary equation is  

$$m^2+\omega^2=0\implies m=\pm \iota \cdot \omega$$

Thus the auxiliary equation has complex roots.  

$$m_1=\omega i, \quad m_2=-\omega i$$

Hence, the general solution of the equation of simple harmonic motion is  

$$x(t)=c_1\cos\omega t+c_2\sin\omega t$$

#### Alternate Form of Solution

It is often convenient to write the above solution in a alternative simpler form.  
Consider  

$$x(t)=c_1\cos\omega t+c_2\sin\omega t$$

and suppose that $A, \phi \in \mathbb R$ such that  

$$c_1=A\sin\phi, \quad c_2=A\cos\phi$$

$$A=\sqrt{c_1^2+c_2^2}, \quad \tan\phi=\frac{c_1}{c_2}$$

$$x(t)=A \sin (\omega t) \cos(\phi) + B\cos(\omega t)\sin(\phi)$$

$$x(t)=A\sin(\omega t+\phi)$$

The number $\phi$ is called the phase angle.

##### Note that

This form of the solution of the equation of simple harmonic motion is very useful because

- Amplitude of free vibrations becomes very obvious
- The times when the body crosses equilibrium position are given by  

$$x=0\Rightarrow \sin(\omega t+\phi)=0$$

$$\omega t+\phi=n\pi$$

Where $n$ is a non negative integer.

#### The Nature of Harmonic Motion

##### Amplitude

We know that the solution of the equation of simple harmonic motion can be written as  

$$x(t)=A\sin(\omega t+\phi)$$

Clearly, the maximum distance that the suspended body can travel on either side of the equilibrium position is $A$.  
This maximum distance called the amplitude of motion and is given by  

$$\text{Amplitude } = A = \sqrt{c_1^2+c_2^2}$$

##### A Vibration or a Cycle

In travelling from $x = A$ to $x = -A$ and then back to $A$, the vibrating body completes one vibration or one cycle.

##### Period of Vibration

The simple harmonic motion of the suspended body is periodic and it repeats its position after a specific time period $T$.  
We know that the distance of the mass at any time $t$ is given by  

$$x=A\sin(\omega t+\phi)$$

$$\because A\sin\left[\omega\left(t+\frac{2\pi}{\omega}\right)+\phi\right]$$

$$=A\sin\left[(\omega t+\phi+2\pi)\right]$$

$$=A\sin[(\omega t+\phi)]$$

Therefore, the distances of the suspended body from the equilibrium position at the times $t$ and $t + \frac {2 \pi} \omega$ are same.  
Further, velocity of the body at any time $t$ is given by  

$$\frac{dx}{dt}=A\omega\cos(\omega t+\phi)$$

$$A\omega\cos\left[\omega\left(t+\frac{2\pi}{\omega}\right)+\phi\right]$$

$$=A\omega\cos[\omega t+\phi+2\pi]$$

$$=A\omega\cos(\omega t+\phi)$$

Therefore the velocity of the body remains unaltered if $t$ is increased by $\frac {2 \pi} \omega$.  
Hence the time period of free vibrations described by the 2nd order differential equation  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\omega^2x=0$$

is given by  

$$T = \frac {2 \pi}{\omega}$$

##### Frequency

The number of vibrations or cycles completed in unit time is known as frequency of the free vibrations, denoted by $f$.  
Since the cycles completed in time $T$ is $1$.  
Therefore, the number of cycles completed in a unit of time is $\frac 1 T$.  

$$f=\frac{1}{T}=\frac{\omega}{2\pi}$$

### Example

Solve and interpret the initial value problem  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+16x=0$$

$$x(0)=10, \quad x'(0)=0$$

#### Interpretation

Comparing the initial conditions  

$$x(0)=10, \quad x'(0)=0$$

with  

$$x(0)=\alpha, \quad x'(0)=\beta$$

we see that  

$$\alpha=10, \quad \beta=0$$

Thus the problem is equivalent to  

- Pulling the mass on a spring 10 units below the equilibrium position.  
- Holding it there until time t = 0 and then releasing the mass from rest.

#### Solution

Consider the differential equation  

$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+16x=0$$

Put  

$$x=e^{mt}, \quad \frac{d^2x}{dt^2}=m^2e^{mt}$$

Then, the auxiliary equation is  

$$m^2+16=0$$

$$\implies m=0\pm4i$$

Therefore, the general solution is:  

$$x(t)=c_1\cos4t+c_2\sin4t$$

Now we apply the initial conditions.  

$$x(0)=10\implies c_1.1+c_2.0=10$$

$$\therefore c_1=10$$

So that  

$$x(t)=10\cos4t+c_2\sin4t$$

$$\frac{dx}{dt}=-40\sin4t+4c_2\cos4t$$

$$\therefore x'(0)=0\implies -40(0)+4c_2.1=0$$

$$\therefore c_2=0$$

Hence, the solution of the initial value problem is  

$$x(t) = 10 \cos 4t$$

##### Note that

- Clearly, the solution shows that once the system is set into motion, it stays in motion with mass bouncing back and forth with amplitude being 10 units.
- Since $\omega = 4$, therefore, the period of oscillations is  

$$T=\frac{2\pi}{4}=\frac{\pi}{2}\text{ seconds}$$

## References

Read more about [[M_Notations|notations and symbols]].
