---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 0025-02-05
---

# 06. Why Use Parallel Computing

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 05-12-2025</span>

- Computing power
- Performance
- Scalability
- Solve large problems
- Provide concurrency
- Cost

## Computing Power

Modern consumer grade computing hardware comes equipped with multiple central processing units (CPUs) and/or graphics processing units (GPUs) that can process many sets of instructions simultaneously.

## Performance

Theoretical performance steadily increased, due to the fact that performance is proportional to the product of the clock frequency and the number of cores.

## Scalability

Problem can be scaled up from size to sizes that were out of reach with a serial application. The larger problem sizes are enabled by the larger amounts of main memory, disk storage, bandwidth over networks and to disk, and CPUs.

## Solve Large Problems

Solve large problems by breaking down larger problems into smaller, independent, often similar parts that can be executed simultaneously by multiple processors communicating via shared memory. Can solve large problems like Web search engines, processing millions of transaction per second, etc.

## Provide Concurrency

Parallelism leads naturally to Concurrency. For example, Several processes trying to print a file on a single printer.

## Cost

The cost of computation would reduce if we are to deploy parallel computation than sequential computation.
