---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2024-12-01
---

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 01-12-2024</span>

# Variation of Parameters

The general solution of the linear first order differential equation of the form  

$$\frac{dy}{dx}+P(x)y=f(x)$$

is given by  

$$y=e^{-\int Pdx}.\int e^{\int Pdx}f(x)dx+c_1e^{-\int Pdx}$$

## Note

- In the last equation, the 2nd term $y_c=c_1e^{-\int Pdx}$ is the solution of the associated homogeneous equation  

$$\frac {dy}{dx} + P(x) y = 0$$

- Similarly, the first term $y_p=e^{-\int Pdx}.\int e^{\int Pdx}.f(x)dx$ is a particular solution of the first order non homogeneous linear differential equation.
- Therefore, the solution is $y = y_c + y_p$.

## The Variation of Parameters

### First order Equation

The particular solution $y_p$ of the first-order linear differential equation is given by

$$
y_p = e^{-\int P dx} \int e^{\int P dx} f(x) dx
$$

This formula can also be derived by another method, known as the variation of parameters. The basic procedure is the same as discussed in the lecture on the construction of a second solution.

Since 

$$
y_1 = e^{-\int P dx}
$$

is the solution of the homogeneous differential equation

$$
\frac{dy}{dx} + P(x)y = 0,
$$

and the equation is linear. Therefore, the general solution of the equation is

$$
y = c_1 y_1(x).
$$

**The variation of parameters** consists of finding a function $u_1(x)$ such that 

$$
y_p = u_1(x) y_1(x)
$$

is a particular solution of the non-homogeneous differential equation

$$
\frac{dy}{dx} + P(x)y = f(x).
$$

Notice that the parameter $c_1$ has been replaced by the variable $u_1$. We substitute $y_p$ in the given equation to obtain

$$
u_1 \left[ \frac{dy_1}{dx} + P(x)y_1 \right] + y_1 \frac{du_1}{dx} = f(x).
$$

Since $y_1$ is a solution of the homogeneous differential equation, we must have

$$
\frac{dy_1}{dx} + P(x)y_1 = 0.
$$

So that we obtain 

$$
y_1 \frac{du_1}{dx} = f(x).
$$

This is a variable separable equation. By separating the variables, we have 

$$
du_1 = \frac{f(x)}{y_1(x)} dx.
$$

Integrating the last expression with respect to $x$, we obtain

$$
u_{1}(x)=\int\frac{f(x)}{y_{1}(x)}dx = \int e^{-\int Pdx} \cdot f(x) dx
$$

Therefore, the particular solution $y_p$ of the given first-order differential equation is:

$$
y = u(x)y_{1}
$$

$$
y_{p} = e^{-\int Pdx} \cdot \int e^{\int Pdx} \cdot f(x) dx
$$

Or

$$
u_{i} = \int\frac{f(x)}{y_{i}(x)}dx
$$

## Second order Equation

Consider the 2ⁿᵈ-order linear non-homogeneous differential equation

$$
a_2(x)y'' + a_1(x)y' + a_0(x)y = g(x).
$$

By dividing with $a_2(x)$, we can write this equation in the standard form

$$
y'' + P(x)y' + Q(x)y = f(x).
$$

The functions $P(x)$, $Q(x)$, and $f(x)$ are continuous on some interval $I$. For the complementary function, we consider the associated homogeneous differential equation

$$
y'' + P(x)y' + Q(x)y = 0.
$$

### Complementary Function

Suppose that $y_1$ and $y_2$ are two linearly independent solutions of the homogeneous equation. Then $y_1$ and $y_2$ form a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous equation on the interval $I$. Thus, the complementary function is

$$
y_c = c_1y_1(x) + c_2y_2(x).
$$

Since $y_1$ and $y_2$ are solutions of the homogeneous equation, we have

$$
y_1'' + P(x)y_1' + Q(x)y_1 = 0
$$

and 

$$
y_2'' + P(x)y_2' + Q(x)y_2 = 0.
$$

### Particular Integral

For finding a particular solution $y_p$, we replace the parameters $c_1$ and $c_2$ in the complementary function with the unknown variables $u_1(x)$ and $u_2(x)$. So that the assumed particular integral is

$$
y_p = u_1(x)y_1(x) + u_2(x)y_2(x).
$$

Since we seek to determine two unknown functions $u_1$ and $u_2$, we need two equations involving these unknowns. One of these two equations results from substituting the assumed particular integral into the differential equation.  
Assumed $y_p$ in the given differential equation. We impose the other equation to simplify the first derivative and thereby the 2ⁿᵈ derivative of $y_p$.

$$
y_p' = u_1'y_1 + u_1y_1' + u_2'y_2 + u_2y_2' = u_1y_1' + u_2y_2' + u_1'y_1 + u_2'y_2.
$$

To avoid 2ⁿᵈ derivatives of $u_1$ and $u_2$, we impose the condition

$$
u_1'y_1 + u_2'y_2 = 0.
$$

Then

$$
y_p' = u_1y_1' + u_2y_2'.
$$

So that

$$
y_p'' = u_1'y_1' + u_1y_1'' + u_2'y_2' + u_2y_2''.
$$

Therefore

$$
y_p'' + P y_p' + Qy_p = u_1'y_1' + u_1y_1'' + u_2'y_2' + u_2y_2'' + Pu_1y_1' + Pu_2y_2' + Qu_1y_1 + Qu_2y_2.
$$

Substituting in the given non-homogeneous differential equation yields

$$
u_1'y_1' + u_1y_1'' + u_2'y_2' + u_2y_2'' + Pu_1y_1' + Pu_2y_2' + Qu_1y_1 + Qu_2y_2 = f(x),
$$

or

$$
u_1[y_1'' + Py_1' + Qy_1] + u_2[y_2'' + Py_2' + Qy_2] + u_1'y_1' + u_2'y_2' = f(x).
$$

Now making use of the relations

$$
y_1'' + P(x)y_1' + Q(x)y_1 = 0
$$

$$
y_2'' + P(x)y_2' + Q(x)y_2 = 0
$$

we obtain

$$
u_1'y_1 + u_2'y_2 = f(x).
$$

Hence $u_1$ and $u_2$ must be functions that satisfy the equations

$$
u_1'y_1 + u_2'y_2 = 0
$$

$$
u_1'y_1' + u_2'y_2' = f(x).
$$

By using Cramer's rule, the solution of this set of equations is given by

$$
u_1' = \frac{W_1}{W}, \quad u_2' = \frac{W_2}{W}
$$

where $W$, $W_1$, and $W_2$ denote the following determinants:

$$
W =
\begin{vmatrix}
y_1 & y_2 \\
y_1' & y_2'
\end{vmatrix},
\quad
W_1 =
\begin{vmatrix}
0 & y_2 \\
f(x) & y_2'
\end{vmatrix},
\quad
W_2 =
\begin{vmatrix}
y_1 & 0 \\
y_1' & f(x)
\end{vmatrix}
$$

The determinant $W$ can be identified as the Wronskian of the solutions $y_1$ and $y_2$. Since the solutions $y_1$ and $y_2$ are linearly independent on $I$. Therefore

$$W(y_1(x), y_2(x)) \neq 0, \forall x \in I$$

Now integrating the expressions for $u'_1$ and $u'_2$, we obtain the values of $u_1$ and $u_2$, hence the particular solution of the non-homogeneous linear differential equation.

## Summary of Method

### Step 1

We find the complementary function by solving the associated homogeneous differential equation:

$$
a_{2}y^{\prime\prime}+a_{1}y^{\prime}+a_{0}y=0
$$

### Step 2

If the complementary function is given by:

$$
y_{c}=c_{1}y_{1}+c_{2}y_{2}
$$

then $y_1$ and $y_2$ are two linearly independent solutions of the homogeneous differential equation. Then compute the Wronskian of these solutions:

$$
W=|\begin{matrix}y_{1}&y_{2}\\ y_{1}^{\prime}&y_{2}^{\prime}\end{matrix}|
$$

### Step 3

By dividing with $a_2$, we transform the given non-homogeneous equation into the standard form:

$$
y^{\prime\prime}+P(x)y^{\prime}+Q(x)y=f(x)
$$

and we identify the function $f(x)$.

### Step 4

We now construct the determinants $W_1$ and $W_2$ given by:

$$
W_{1}=[\begin{matrix}0&y_{2}\\ f(x)&y_{2}^{\prime}\end{matrix}]
$$

$$
W_{2}=|\begin{matrix}y_{1}&0\\ y_{1}^{\prime}&f(x)\end{matrix}|
$$

### Step 5

Next, we determine the derivatives of the unknown variables $u_1$ and $u_2$ through the relations:

$$
u_{1}^{\prime}=\frac{W_{1}}{W}
$$

$$
u_{2}^{\prime}=\frac{W_{2}}{W}
$$

### Step 6

Integrate the derivatives $u_1'$ and $u_2'$ to find the unknown variables $u_1$ and $u_2$. So that  

$$u_1 = \int {\frac {W_1} W} dx$$

$$u_2 = \int {\frac {W_2} W} dx$$

### Step 7

A particular solution of the given non-homogeneous equation can be written as:

$$
y_p = u_1y_1 + u_2y_2
$$

### Step 8

The general solution of the differential equation is then given by:

$$
y = y_c + y_p = c_1y_1 + c_2y_2 + u_1y_1 + u_2y_2
$$

### Constants of Integration

We don't need to introduce the constants of integration when computing the indefinite integrals in Step 6 to find the unknown functions 1 of $u_1$ and $u_2$. For, if we do introduce these constants, then:

$$
y_p = (u_1 + a_1)y_1 + (u_2 + b_1)y_2
$$

So that the general solution of the given non-homogeneous differential equation is:

$$
y = y_c + y_p = c_1y_1 + c_2y_2 + (u_1 + a_1)y_1 + (u_2 + b_1)y_2
$$

$$
y = (c_1 + a_1)y_1 + (c_2 + b_1)y_2 + u_1y_1 + u_2y_2
$$

If we replace $c_1 + a_1$ with $C_1$ and $c_2 + b_1$ with $C_2$, we obtain:

$$
y = C_1y_1 + C_2y_2 + u_1y_1 + u_2y_2
$$

This does not provide anything new and is similar to the general solution found in Step 8, namely:

$$
y = c_1y_1 + c_2y_2 + u_1y_1 + u_2y_2
$$

## Example

**Solve**

$$
y'' - 4y' + 4y = (x + 1)e^{2x}
$$

### Solution

#### Step 1

To find the complementary function

$$
y'' - 4y' + 4y = 0
$$

Put

$$
y = e^{mx}
$$

$$
y' = me^{mx}
$$

$$
y'' = m^2e^{mx}
$$

Then the auxiliary equation is

$$
m^2 - 4m + 4 = 0
$$

$$
(m - 2)^2 = 0 \Rightarrow m = 2, 2
$$

Repeated real roots of the auxiliary equation

$$
y_c = c_1e^{2x} + c_2xe^{2x}
$$

#### Step 2

By inspecting the complementary function $y_c$, we make the identification:

$$
y_1 = e^{2x} \quad \text{and} \quad y_2 = xe^{2x}
$$

$$
W(y_1, y_2) = W(e^{2x}, xe^{2x}) = \begin{vmatrix} e^{2x} & xe^{2x} \\ 2e^{2x} & 2xe^{2x} + e^{2x} \end{vmatrix} = e^{4x} \neq 0, \forall x
$$

#### Step 3

The given differential equation is:

$$
y'' - 4y' + 4y = (x + 1)e^{2x}
$$

Since this equation is already in the standard form:

$$
y'' + P(x)y' + Q(x)y = f(x)
$$

Therefore, we identify the function $f(x)$ as:

$$
f(x) = (x + 1)e^{2x} 1 
$$

#### Step 4

We now construct the determinants $W_1$ and $W_2$:

$$
W_1 = \begin{vmatrix} 0 & xe^{2x} \\ (x + 1)e^{2x} & 2xe^{2x} + e^{2x} \end{vmatrix} = -(x + 1)xe^{4x}
$$

$$
W_2 = \begin{vmatrix} e^{2x} & 0 \\ 2e^{2x} & (x + 1)e^{2x} \end{vmatrix} = (x + 1)e^{4x}
$$

#### Step 5

We determine the derivatives of the functions $u_1$ and $u_2$:

$$
u_1' = \frac{W_1}{W} = \frac{-(x + 1)xe^{4x}}{e^{4x}} = -x^2 - x
$$

$$
u_2' = \frac{W_2}{W} = \frac{(x + 1)e^{4x}}{e^{4x}} = x + 1
$$

#### Step 6

Integrating the last two expressions, we obtain:

$$
u_1 = \int (-x^2 - x) dx = -\frac{x^3}{3} - \frac{x^2}{2}
$$

$$
u_2 = \int (x + 1) dx = \frac{x^2}{2} + x
$$

**Remember:** We don't have to add the constants of integration.

#### Step 7

Therefore, a particular solution of the given differential equation is:

$$
y_p = \left(-\frac{x^3}{3} - \frac{x^2}{2}\right)e^{2x} + \left(\frac{x^2}{2} + x\right)xe^{2x}
$$

or  

$$y_p = \left(\frac {x^3} 6 + \frac {x^2} 2\right)e^{2x}$$

#### Step 8

Hence, the general solution of the given differential equation is:

$$
y = y_c + y_p = c_1e^{2x} + c_2xe^{2x} + \left(-\frac{x^3}{6} + \frac{x^2}{2}\right)e^{2x}
$$

## References

Read more about [[M_Notations|notations and symbols]].
