docs/University Notes/semester 5/CS205 - Information Security/Week 1/4. Ch01. Who is information security for/Lecture.md, before:

---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2024-10-31
---

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 31-10-2024</span>

# Ch1: Who is Information Security For?

## Personal

- Social media passwords and safe usage
- Online banking and email account passwords
- Home PC/laptop security
- Mobile security

## Organizational

- Board and executive leadership (management commitment)
- CISO (responsible to drive security program)
- IT staff and business users (following information security policies & procedures)

## Government and National

- Law enforcement  
- Legal and policy  
- making  
- National database  
- Critical infrastructure  
- Regulation  
- Standards and certification  
- Capacity-building and coordination

## Itu Report

It covers following aspects

- Legal
- Technical
- Organizational
- Capacity building
- Cooperation

### Ranking of Pakistan in the Report

- Pakistan was ranked very low by ITU in security table
- Pakistan Cyber Security Association (PCSA) formed to address Pakistan's international ranking

## Assessment Questions

1. Pakistan ranked almost at the `bottom` of the table in International ranking by ITU.
2. In context of cyber security, PCSA stands for `Pakistan Cyber Security Association`.
3. `PCSA` is formed to address Pakistan's international ranking.

Commit message:

Updated: Post Assessments in cs205 beginning lectures

docs/University Notes/semester 5/CS205 - Information Security/Week 1/4. Ch01. Who is information security for/Lecture.md, after:

---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2024-10-31
---

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 31-10-2024</span>

# Ch1: Who is Information Security For?

## Personal

- Social media passwords and safe usage
- Online banking and email account passwords
- Home PC/laptop security
- Mobile security

## Organizational

- Board and executive leadership (management commitment)
- CISO (responsible to drive security program)
- IT staff and business users (following information security policies & procedures)

## Government and National

- Law enforcement  
- Legal and policy  
- making  
- National database  
- Critical infrastructure  
- Regulation  
- Standards and certification  
- Capacity-building and coordination

## Itu Report

It covers following aspects

- Legal
- Technical
- Organizational
- Capacity building
- Cooperation

### Ranking of Pakistan in the Report

- Pakistan was ranked very low by ITU in security table
- Pakistan Cyber Security Association (PCSA) formed to address Pakistan's international ranking

> [!question]- Post Assessment
> 
> > [!question] Pakistan ranked almost at the _ of the table in International ranking by ITU.
> > - [x] bottom
> > - [ ] middle
> > - [ ] top
> 
> > [!question] In context of cyber security, PCSA stands for _.
> > - [x] Pakistan Cyber Security Association
> > - [ ] Pakistan Cyber Safety Agency
> > - [ ] Pakistan Cyber Security Agency
> > - [ ] Pakistan Cyber Safety Association
> 
> > [!question] _ is formed to address Pakistan's international ranking.
> > - [x] PCSA
> > - [ ] CISO
