---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2025-04-28
---

# Lecture No. 06

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 28-04-2025</span>

## Operations on Processes

- Creation
- Deletion

### Process Creation

A `process` (the `parent process`) may use `create-process` system call to create `child processes` which later can create other `processes`, creating a hierarchy.

These `child processes` may take resources from the `operating system` or are restricted to a subset of resources given to their `parent process` which avoids overloading the system.

During the execution, there are 2 possibilities.

1. The `parent` continues to execute concurrently with its `children`.
2. The `parent` waits for its `children` to terminate.

In terms of address space, there are 2 possibilities.

1. The `child process` is a duplicate of the `parent process`. 
2. The `child process` has a program loaded into it.


In `UNIX`, each `process` is identified by a unique integer (`PID`).  
A new `process` is created with the `fork` system call, duplicating the `parent`'s address space.  
Both `parent` and `child` continue `execution` after `fork`, with the `child` receiving a return code of $0$, and the `parent` receiving the `child`'s `PID`.  
Typically, `execlp` is called by one `process` to replace its memory with a new `program`.  
The `parent` can create more `children` or use `wait` to pause until a `child` terminates, after which it continues and exits.

### Process Termination

- **Normal Termination**:
    - `Process` calls `#!cpp exit()` after finishing execution.
    - `OS` deallocates all resources.
    - Data may be returned to the `parent` via `#!cpp wait()`.
- **Forced Termination**:
    - `Parent` can terminate `child` (e.g., with `#!cpp abort()`).
    - Reasons: resource overuse, task no longer needed, `parent` exiting.
- **Cascading Termination**:
    - Some systems automatically terminate `children` if `parent` exits.
- **UNIX Behavior**:
    - `#!cpp exit()` and `#!cpp wait()` manage process termination and synchronization.
    - Orphaned `children` are adopted by the `init` process.

## The `#!cpp fork()` System Call

When `#!cpp fork()` is called, a new `child process` is created with a copy of the `parent`’s address space, enabling easy communication.  
Both `parent` and `child` continue after `#!cpp fork()`, with the `child` receiving $0$ and the `parent` receiving the `child`’s `PID`.  
If `#!cpp fork()` fails, it returns $-1$ to the parent and no child is created.

After the `#!cpp fork()` system call the `parent` and the `child` share the following

- Environment  
- Open file descriptor table  
- Signal handling settings  
- Nice value  
- Current working directory  
- Root directory  
- File mode creation mask (umask)

The following things are different in the `parent` and the `child`:

- Different process ID (`PID`)  
- Different parent process ID (`PPID`)  
- `Child` has its own copy of `parent`'s file descriptors

The `#!cpp fork()` call may fail due to following reasons

- System reached maximum number of `processes`
- User reached maximum number of `processes`
- Not enough `swap space`