---
tags:
  - university-notes
university-name: Virtual University of Pakistan
date: 2025-03-14
---

# Lecture No. 01

<span style="color: gray;">Dated: 14-03-2025</span>

## Organization of a Computer System

The major high-level components of a computer system are

### Hardware

Manages basic computing resources such as `CPU`, `memory` and `I/O` devices etc.

### Operating System

Provides user an easy to use access to the machine.

### Application Programs

Defines the ways to solve computational problems for the user.

### Users

Includes peoples, programs or machines.

## Purpose of a Computer, Setting the Stage for Os Concepts and Principles

Computer systems are combination of software and hard to provide solutions to computational problems.  
The layout seems as follows:  
Memory units (such as `RAM`, `ROM`, `Storage`) are connected to `CPU` (with its own internal units) through `memory bus`.  
The `CPU` is also connected to other peripherals through system bus.

### Problems while Executing Programs

- Storing on storage devices.
- Loading into main memory.
- Setting up the `CPU` state for usage of this program.
- Creating multiple cooperating processes which talk with each other.

### Requirements from the Operating System

- Manage secondary storage
	- Allocate appropriate amount of disk space when files are created
	- Deallocate space when files are removing
	- Insure that a new file does not overwrite an existing file
	- Schedule disk requests
- Manage primary storage
	- Allocate appropriate amount of memory space when programs are to be
	- loaded into the memory for executing
	- Deallocate space when processes terminate
	- Insure that a new process is not loaded on top of an existing process
	- Insure that a process does not access memory space that does not belong to it
	- Minimize the amount of unused memory space
	- Allow execution of programs larger in size than the available main memory
- Manage processes
	- Allow simultaneous execution of processes by scheduling the CPU(s)
	- Prevent deadlocks between processes
	- Insure integrity of shared data
	- Synchronize executions of cooperating processes
- Allow a user to manage his files and directories properly
	- User view of directory structure
	- Provide a mechanism that allows users to protect their files and directories

## What is an Operating System

An operating system is a resource manager which bridges the gap between software and hardware. It abstracts away the details from user to make his work easier.