docs/index.md, before:

# Read Me

## Thanks to

- The [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) team for giving people a tool to write documents in a very powerful and convenient way.
- The [Mkdocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) team for allowing people to generate a static website based on markdown notes.
- The [Mkdocs Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) team for a lot of additional features on top of the static site.
- [@jobindjohn](https://github.com/jobindjohn/) for the [CI/CD workflow](https://github.com/jobindjohn/obsidian-publish-mkdocs).

## Me

I have overridden the defaults into my own slight tweaks.

## Disclaimer

Whatever you will read on this site, is my understanding / interpretation of things.  
Therefore, do expect typos and errors and I would strongly advice the reader to fact check the information you get from here.

## Contributions

If you do find some errors and want to raise awareness, you can create an `issue` on [this repository](https://github.com/ChuzaWick420/notes_publisher).

Commit message:

Did few changes
Completed: CS402_25
Added: C_printf_conversions
Added: more diagrams to Project platformer
Changed: index.md

docs/index.md, after:

# Read Me

## Thanks to

- The [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) team for providing a tool to write documents in a powerful and convenient way.
- The [Mkdocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) team for providing a tool to generate a static site out of markdown files.
- The [Mkdocs Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) team for providing a theme which makes the site look and function amazingly.
- [@jobindjohn](https://github.com/jobindjohn/) for the [CI/CD workflow](https://github.com/jobindjohn/obsidian-publish-mkdocs).

## Me

I am a Computer Science student, a curious person who  
- Loves to learn cool things such as a concept in Mathematics or Computer Science, a new technology or maybe even a new programming language.  
- Thinks deeply about things such as philosophy of nature, mathematics, programming and their connections with each oher.  
- Crafts creative things such as games, graphics and other cool things.

I do not claim to be good at all the things I do. It is just that I love doing them.

## Disclaimer

Due to the scale of the project and limitation of time, it is hard to write things effectively and manage them, which causes the website to go through organizational changes and edits over time. Therefore, it is not recommended to use any of the pages as references through hyperlinks.

## Contributions

You may create an `issue` on [this repository](https://github.com/ChuzaWick420/notes_publisher) to let me know about editorial errors.
